<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Why Should He Refrain?</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Why should he not marry Colonel Marchant’s daughter? Vansittart asked himself, in the quiet of those night watches which are said to bring counsel.</p>
			<p>Why should he not marry Eve Marchant? asked Jack Vansittart of Counsellor Night. He was lord not only of himself but of a handsome income and a desirable estate. He had nobody to please but himself, and⁠—well, yes, he wanted to please his mother, even in a matter so entirely personal as his choice of a wife. She had been so devoted a mother, and they had loved each other so dearly! In all his life he had kept only one secret from her⁠—the secret of that night at Venice. In all his life he had only once told her a lie; when he told her he had not been in Venice during that last Italian tour. He wanted to please her, if it were possible, in this most serious question of his marriage. He knew that she loved him too unselfishly to be sorry that he should marry, albeit marriage must in some wise lessen their companionship as mother and son. The major half of his existence must needs belong to the woman he chose for his wife. His mother was resigned to take her lesser place in his life, she had often told him, provided that the wife were worthy.</p>
			<p>“Pure as well as beautiful, sprung from an honourable race, reared by a good mother.”</p>
			<p>These were the conditions she had laid upon his choice. What would she think of Colonel Marchant’s daughter, motherless, the child of a disreputable father, a girl reared under every social disadvantage; a girl who had dragged herself up anyhow, according to village gossips; a girl who had neither accomplishments nor education, and who had shown herself an audacious flirt, said the village⁠—for Eve’s frank freedom of speech and manner was the rustic idea of audacity in flirtation? To talk easily with a man under forty was to be an outrageous flirt. The rustic idea of a well-conducted young woman was simpering silence.</p>
			<p>What would his mother think of such a choice; his mother, who had been born and bred in just that stratum of English respectability which is narrowest in its sociology and strongest in its prejudices; his mother, who belonged to the county families, those deeply rooted children of the soil to whom the word trade is an abomination; who think that the Church and the Army were established for the maintenance of their younger sons, who consider they make a concession when they send a son to the Bar, and who shudder at the notion of a doctor or a solicitor issuing from their superior circles? What would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart think of an alliance with the daughter of a man whose name was dishonoured, who, albeit he too had been born of that elect race, and was indisputably “county,” had made himself a pauper and an outcast by his misconduct, and who had lived for the last nine years in a Bohemian and utterly intolerable manner, spending his time mysteriously in London, letting his daughters run wild, and having to be summoned for his rates and taxes?</p>
			<p>The charges against Colonel Marchant, as Vansittart had heard them, were manifold. He had begun life in a marching regiment, without expectations, had married a lovely girl of low birth, or supposed to be of low birth, since her pedigree was unknown to Sussex, and her antecedents and uprising had never been explained or expounded to the curious in the neighbourhood of the Colonel’s present abode. Within two years of this marriage he had succeeded, most unexpectedly, by the death of a young cousin, to a fine estate in Yorkshire, considerably dipped by previous owners, but still a fine estate, and had immediately begun a career of extravagance, horse-racing, betting, and disreputable company, which had ultimately forced him to sell mansion and manor, farms and homesteads, that had belonged to his family since the Commonwealth, when the lands of East Grinley were bestowed by Cromwell on one of his finest soldiers, Major Fear-the-Lord Marchant, an officer who had helped to turn the fortunes of the day at Marston Moor, and who had been left for dead on the field of Dunbar.</p>
			<p>Colonel Marchant had kept race-horses, and in his latter and worst days⁠—when ruin was close at hand⁠—had been suspected of shady dealings in the management of his stud, and had been the subject of a Jockey Club inquiry, which, albeit not important enough to become a cause célèbre, had left the Colonel with a tarnished reputation on the Turf, and the dark suspicion of having made a good deal of money by in and out running. He withdrew from the racing world under a cloud, not quite cleaned out, for the money he had won in the previous autumn served to buy the cottage near Fernhurst, and to carry his family from Yorkshire to Sussex. Here he began life anew, a ruined man, with five young daughters and an invalid wife.</p>
			<p>Of Colonel Marchant’s existence at the Homestead local society had very little to say, except in a general way that he was not “nice.” He neglected his daughters, he never went to church, and he was always in debt. Maiden ladies and old women of the masculine gender used to speculate upon how long he would be able to go on before his creditors took desperate measures. How long would Midhurst and Haslemere bear and forbear with a man who was known to be deep in debt in both towns? All this and much more had John Vansittart heard from various people since the night of the hunt ball, for he had laid himself out with considerable artfulness to hear all he could about the Marchant family. In the beginning of things, albeit Eve appeared to him in all the innocent loveliness of Titania, he had told himself that he could not marry into such a family. Such an alliance would blight his life. He would have those four sisters upon his shoulders. He would be disgraced by a disreputable father-in-law.</p>
			<p>And now in the night watches he told himself a very different story. He told himself that he should be a craven and a cur if he allowed Eve Marchant to suffer for her father’s sins. What was it to him that the Colonel had squandered his money on third-rate racers, and had been suspected of in and out running on second-rate racecourses? He loved the Colonel’s daughter; and as an honest man it was his duty to take her away from unworthy surroundings. Inclination and honesty pointing the same way, he was determined to do his duty⁠—yes, even at the risk of disappointing the mother he loved.</p>
			<p>So much for the night watches. He saw before him a fierce battle between love and prejudice, but he was determined to fight that battle.</p>
			<p>The war began while this resolve was yet a new thing.</p>
			<p>“So you have been calling at the Homestead, Jack,” said his sister at luncheon next day.</p>
			<p>“Who told you that?” he asked curtly, reddening a little.</p>
			<p>“One of those little birds of which we have a whole aviary. I drove into Midhurst this morning to talk to the fishmonger, and met the two Miss Etheringtons. They saw you going in at Colonel Marchant’s gate yesterday afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“I wonder they didn’t wait outside to see when I came out again,” said Vansittart.</p>
			<p>“I dare say they would have waited if it had been warmer weather. What could have induced you to call upon Colonel Marchant? Colonel, indeed! Colonel of a Yorkshire Volunteer regiment! I don’t believe he was ever any higher than ensign in the 107th.”</p>
			<p>“Very likely not. But I didn’t call upon the Colonel; I called upon my partners at the hunt ball.”</p>
			<p>“And no doubt they received you with open arms!”</p>
			<p>“They received me with true Yorkshire hospitality, and gave me some excellent tea, to say nothing of buttered plum-loaf.”</p>
			<p>“And I dare say they were not in the least embarrassed at doing the honours to a strange young man, without mother, or aunt, or so much as a governess to keep them in countenance.”</p>
			<p>“Why should they require to be kept in countenance? Surely five girls ought to be chaperon enough for each other?”</p>
			<p>“They are the most unconventional young women I ever met with,” said the eldest Miss Champernowne, who was a good judge of the conventional.</p>
			<p>“They are very pretty, poor things,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart. “It is sad for them to belong to such a father.”</p>
			<p>“You might spare your pity, mother,” exclaimed her son, growing angry. “I don’t know anything about Colonel Marchant; but I haven’t the slightest doubt that the things that are said about him in this neighbourhood are the usual exaggerations and distortions of the truth. As for his daughters, I never made the acquaintance of five brighter, healthier, merrier girls. The household is full of interest for me; and I want you to call at the Homestead with me, mother, and see with your own eyes what manner of girls Eve Marchant and her sisters are.”</p>
			<p>“I call upon them, Jack!” exclaimed his mother. “I, who am only a visitor here! What good could that do?”</p>
			<p>“Plenty of good, if you like. You don’t live quite at the other end of England. From Haslemere to Liss is not half an hour’s journey; and if you happen to like Miss Marchant⁠—as I think you will⁠—you might ask her to visit you at Merewood.”</p>
			<p>A light dawned upon the hitherto unsuspecting mother, a light which was far from welcome. She sat looking at her son dumbly.</p>
			<p>“Why not ask the whole five, while you are about it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart?” said Claudia Champernowne, her thin lips contracting a little, as if she, too, saw cause for offence in Vansittart’s suggestion.</p>
			<p>“My dear Jack, you must know I am the last person in the world to invite strange young women to my house⁠—young women whose Bohemian ways would make me miserable,” remonstrated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart, severely. “I can’t think what can have put such an idea into your head.”</p>
			<p>“Christian charity, no doubt,” sneered Claudia.</p>
			<p>“Well, after all, these girls are not actually disreputable,” pleaded Lady Hartley, who was always good-natured; “one sees them at all the omnium gatherums in the neighbourhood, and they don’t behave worse than the general run of girls. If you had asked me to take notice of them, Jack, I could understand you⁠—but to bother mother⁠—mother who lives in another county, and who can’t be supposed to care about taking up strange girls.”</p>
			<p>“So be it, Maud. You shall go with me the next time I call at the Homestead.”</p>
			<p>“What, you are actually going to keep up a calling acquaintance with the Marchant girls? How very eccentric!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I am going to keep up my acquaintance with the Miss Marchants. I am going to make myself acquainted with their father. I am going to see with my own eyes whether Lucifer is quite as black as he is painted,” answered Vansittart, doggedly.</p>
			<p>“You won’t like the Colonel. I am positive upon that point,” said Maud. “Hubert is an excellent judge of character, and he couldn’t stand the Colonel; although he felt sorry for the man and tried to be civil to him. Colonel Marchant is an impossible person.”</p>
			<p>“What has he done that makes him impossible?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I really can’t give you the exact details; but they say all sorts of unpleasant things about him.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘They say.’ We know who ‘they’ are⁠—an unknown quantity, which, when inquired into, resolves itself into half a dozen old women of both sexes.”</p>
			<p>“Unhappily everybody knows that he is in debt all over the neighbourhood.”</p>
			<p>“He must be a remarkable man to have found a neighbourhood so trustful.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I suppose he pays a little on account from time to time, or he would not be able to go on anyhow; but really, now, Jack, you can’t expect me to be on intimate terms with a household of that kind. I am very glad to have those poor girls at my garden-parties, for they are pretty and tolerably well-behaved, though their frocks and hats are too dreadful. What did I tell you Lady Corisande Hawberk called those poor girls when she saw them here last summer, Claudia?”</p>
			<p>“Lady Hartley’s burlesque troupe.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that was it⁠—Lady Hartley’s burlesque troupe! They were all three dressed differently⁠—and so fine⁠—especially the two younger. The eldest is a shade more enlightened. One wore cheap black lace over apricot silk⁠—you are a man, so you don’t know what cheap black lace means⁠—and a Gainsborough hat. Another was in peach-coloured cotton⁠—that papery, shiny cotton, which is meant to look like silk, with a straw sailor hat all over nodding peach-coloured poppies⁠—and her parasol!⁠—heavens, her parasol! bright scarlet cotton, and six feet high! Lady Corisande was immensely amused.”</p>
			<p>“Is poverty so good a joke?” asked Vansittart, black as thunder.</p>
			<p>“Oh, it wasn’t their poverty one laughed at. It was their childlike ignorance of our world and its ways. If they had all three worn clean white frocks and neat straw hats they would have looked charming. It was the effort to be in the height of fashion⁠—”</p>
			<p>“With colours and materials three years old,” put in Claudia.</p>
			<p>“I tell you it is poverty you laugh at⁠—poverty alone that is ridiculous. We have arrived at a state of things in which there is nothing respected or respectable except money. We pretend to honour rank and ancient lineage, but in our secret hearts we set no value on either unless sustained by wealth.”</p>
			<p>“What a tirade!” cried Lady Hartley, “and all because of a little good-natured laughter at those girls’ frocks. To think that a pretty face, which you have seen only twice, should exercise such dominion over you!”</p>
			<p>The ladies left the dining-room in a cluster to put on their hats for a walk to the ice. Skating was the rage at Redwold Towers, and even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart went to look on. She liked to see her son and daughter disporting themselves, each an adept in the art; and then there was the off-chance of meeting the German nurse with the year-old baby somewhere in the grounds before sunset. The baby had already taken a strong grip upon the grandmother’s heart.</p>
			<p>John Vansittart did not go with the skaters, as it had been his wont to go. Nor did he offer to keep his mother company in her afternoon walk. He was in a sullen and resentful mood, resentful of he knew not what; so he started on a solitary ramble in the Redwold copses, where he would have only robins and jays and chaffinches, and the infinite variety of living things whose names he knew not, for his companions.</p>
			<p>He was angry with all those talking women, his sister first and foremost; but most of all was he angry with himself.</p>
			<p>Yes, it was her beauty that had caught him, that picture of Titania delicately fair against the darkly purple night, her pale gold hair, her sapphire eyes shining in the starlight. Yes, his sister’s flippant tongue had hit upon the humiliating truth. It was only because this girl appealed to his fancy that he was so eager and so angry, this girl whom he had seen the other night for the first time, of whose heart, character, antecedents, kindred, he knew absolutely nothing. It was only because she was so lovely in his eyes that he was prepared to champion her, ready to marry her if she would have him.</p>
			<p>“I am a fool,” he told himself, “an arrant fool, a fool so foolish that even shallow-brained Maud can see my folly. I know nothing of this girl, absolutely nothing except that surface frankness which passes for innocence⁠—and which might be assumed by Becky Sharp herself. Indeed, we are told that it was Becky’s guilelessness which always impressed people in her favour. May not this girl, daughter of a shady father, be every bit as clever and far-seeing as Becky Sharp? I dare say she is laughing at my infatuation already, and wondering how far it will lead me. Sefton, too! Miss Green said there was an understanding between them. His manner was certainly a thought too easy. No doubt she is trying to hook Sefton, a landowner, one of the best matches in the neighbourhood. And she puts on that stand-offish manner of malice aforethought, to lead him on by keeping him off. I should be an idiot if I were to commit myself, without knowing a great deal more about the young lady. I have been getting absolutely maudlin about the girl. This is how half the unhappy marriages are made.”</p>
			<p>He stopped in his swinging walk, after tramping along the narrow muddy track at five miles an hour. The ring of the skates, the shouts of boys playing hockey, sounded clear upon the frosty air. He was not more than a mile from the pond as the crow flies.</p>
			<p>“Sophy said their gowns would be finished this morning,” he mused. “I wonder whether they will be on the ice this afternoon.”</p>
			<p>He tramped the narrow track between the thick growth of oak and fir, emerged from the copse, and struck out a path across some low-lying pastures to the lake, which lay in the lowest part of Redwold Park, and only five minutes’ walk from one of the lodges, where some of the skaters kept their skates. There were a good many skaters this fine bright afternoon⁠—an afternoon in which there was no consciousness of cold, though the atmosphere was twelve degrees below freezing point, just such a calm, clear atmosphere as Vansittart had often enjoyed in the Upper Engadine. There were a good many people on the ice⁠—the villagers at one end of the long irregular-shaped piece of water, the gentry at the other⁠—a rustic bridge dividing the classes from the masses. About twenty girls were playing hockey, the three Champernownes conspicuous among the rest by their fine carriage and sober attire. Those girls had certainly mastered the art of dress, Vansittart admitted to himself. They wore black serge gowns, cut to perfection by a fashionable tailor, black cloth jackets, tight-fitting, severe, with narrow collar and cuffs of Astrakhan, at a time when Astrakhan was not everybody’s wear. Their hats were the neatest on the ice⁠—black felt hats, with the least touch of scarlet in the loose knot of corded ribbon which was their only trimming. No wings, claws, or beaks; no anchors, arrows, crescents, or buckles of jet, gilt or steel; none of those tawdry accessories which sometimes convert a young lady’s headgear into a museum of curiosities. Long tan gloves, fresh and perfectly fitting, completed the toilet of the three sisters, who had early realized the effect that is made in any public assembly by three handsome girls dressed alike.</p>
			<p>Jack Vansittart paced the bank, stopping now and then to watch the skating, but with no inclination to join the revellers. The walk along the side of the lake was a pleasant walk, in some parts open to the water, in other places screened by hazel and alder. Here and there in a bend of the lake there was a hillock, on which the skaters sat to take off or adjust their skates, and on which the spectators sometimes stood to watch the sport.</p>
			<p>From this point of vantage Vansittart surveyed the scene, and as he did so became conscious of a man standing on the opposite side of the lake, also surveying the scene. A second glance assured him that the man was Sefton. He had only seen Sefton at the ball, but he could not be mistaken in that sharp, hooked nose, sallow complexion, and black beard. It was Sefton, lightly clad, as if prepared for skating, but holding himself aloof from the throng.</p>
			<p>There was a fascination for Vansittart in this solitary spectator, and it was while watching him that he became aware of a new arrival. Sefton, whose hawk-like eyes had been looking up and down the lake, suddenly concentrated his attention on one spot at the end near the lodge, and as suddenly walked off in that direction. Vansittart imitated him on his side of the lake, and was speedily enlightened as to the cause of Sefton’s movements. As he neared the lodge gate he saw three young women approaching⁠—three young women in blue gowns, widely different in shade.</p>
			<p>Now, the Champernownes and his sister⁠—who talked of chiffons for an hour at a stretch⁠—had dinned into his brain the fact that blue was not worn that winter. The colour might be a beautiful colour in the abstract, the colour of sky and sea, of sapphires and forget-me-nots, of children’s eyes and running brooks, but it was a colour which no woman who respected herself would wear. It was “out,” and that monosyllable meant that it was anathema maranatha.</p>
			<p>And behold here came the three girls in their new winter frocks, a blaze of blue; Sophy splendid in peacock cloth, trimmed with plush that <em>almost</em> matched; Jenny in uncompromising azure, the blue of Reckitt’s and the British laundress; Eve less startling in a dark Oxford cloth, very plainly made, with a little home-made toque of the same stuff.</p>
			<p>The fact was that the fashionable drapers were almost giving away their blue stuffs that January, and the prudent Marchants had been able to get the best materials at a third of their value.</p>
			<p>“And after all it isn’t the colour, but the style of a gown that makes it fashionable or otherwise,” Sophy had said philosophically, as she pored over a fashion plate, trying to realize a creation which nobody ever saw out of that fashion plate.</p>
			<p>The girls seemed quite happy in their blue raiment, or at least the two younger girls, who greeted Vansittart with frank cordiality. Eve had a somewhat absent air as she shook hands, he thought, though her sudden blush thrilled him with the fancy that he might not be quite indifferent to her. He saw her glance away from him while they were talking, and look right and left, as if expecting to see some one. Could it be Sefton? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sefton came across the ice while Vansittart was asking himself that question, shook hands with the three girls, and then walked away with Eve along the path, where the hazels and alders soon hid them from the jealous eyes that followed their steps. “Miss Green was right,” thought Vansittart; “there is an understanding between them.”</p>
			<p>The two younger girls skipped off to an adjacent bank to put on their skates, and were soon provided with a pair of youthful admirers, both clerical, to assist them in the operation. Vansittart stood looking idly at the hockey-playing for some minutes, quite long enough to allow Eve and her companion to get a good way towards the further end of the pond, and then he turned and strolled in the same direction. As he sauntered on, disgusted with life and the world, which seemed just now made up of disillusions, he heard slow footsteps approaching him, just where the path made a sudden bend, footsteps and voices.</p>
			<p>They were coming back, those two. They had not prolonged their tête-à-tête. The aspect of affairs was not quite so black as it had seemed ten minutes ago. He did not purposely listen to what they were saying. The sharp bend of the path, screened at this point by a clump of hazels, divided him from them. Short of calling out to them to warn them of his vicinity he could not have avoided hearing what he did hear: only five short sentences.</p>
			<p>“I am very sorry. It was a false scent,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sefton.</p>
			<p>“And we are no nearer knowing anything?”</p>
			<p>“No nearer. I sincerely regret your disappointment.”</p>
			<p>There was a lingering tenderness in his tone that made Vansittart feel a touch of the original savage that lives in all of us⁠—a rush of boiling blood to brain and heart which hints at the hereditary taint transmitted by bloodthirsty ancestors. A few more steps and he and Miss Marchant were face to face, as she and her companion turned the corner of the hazel clump. She looked at him piteously through a veil of tears as they passed each other. Sefton had power to make her cry. Surely that implied something more than common acquaintance, nay, even more than friendship. All the tragedy of an unhappy love affair might be in those tears.</p>
			<p>He looked back. She and Sefton had parted company. He was talking to some men on the bank. She had joined her sisters on the ice, and was standing with her skates in her hand, as if debating whether to put them on or not.</p>
			<p>Should he go and entreat to be allowed to kneel at her feet, and do her knightly service by buckling stiff buckles and battling with difficult straps? No, he would not be such a slave. Let Sefton wait upon her; Sefton, who had all her confidence; Sefton, who could bring tears to those lovely eyes.</p>
			<p>Vansittart rambled off across the frozen pasture, turning his back resolutely upon the noise of many voices, the ringing of many skates.</p>
			<p>“It was a false scent.” What could that possibly mean? How in the language of lovers could that phrase come in? A false scent. “I deeply regret your disappointment.” What disappointment? Why should she be disappointed, and Sefton regretful? In any love affair between those two there could seem no reason for disappointment. The man was free to marry whom he pleased. Did he mean honourably by this girl; or was he only fooling her with attentions which were to end in unworthy trifling? Was he taking a base advantage of her dubious position to essay the seducer’s part? From all that he had heard of Sefton’s character Vansittart doubted much that he was capable of a generous love, or that he was the kind of man to marry a girl whose father was under a cloud.</p>
			<p>And she?⁠—was she weak and foolish, innocently yielding her heart to a man who meant evil? or was she her father’s daughter, a schemer by instinct and inclination, like Becky Sharp? Vansittart tried to put himself in Joe Sedley’s place, tried to realize how a man may see honesty and sweet simplicity where there are only craft and finished acting. To poor vain Josh Becky had seemed all truth and girlish innocence. Only one man of all Becky’s admirers had ever thoroughly understood her, and that man was Lord Steyne.</p>
			<p>Vansittart walked a long way, engrossed by such speculations as these⁠—at one time inclined to believe that this girl whom he so ardently admired was all that girlhood should be⁠—inclined to trust her even in the face of all strange seeming, to trust her and to follow her footsteps with his reverent love, and if he found her responsive to that love to take her for his wife, in the teeth of all opposition.</p>
			<p>“Why should my mother be made unhappy by such a marriage?” he asked himself. “If I can prove that Eve Marchant is in no wise injured by her surroundings, what more do we want? What are the surroundings to my mother or to me? Even if I had to pension the Colonel for the rest of his life I should think little of the cost⁠—if it brought me the girl I love.”</p>
			<p>After all, he told himself time was the only test⁠—time must decide everything. His duty to himself was to possess his soul with patience, to see as much as he could of the Marchant family without committing himself to a matrimonial engagement, and without being guilty of anything that could be deemed flirtation. No, he would trifle with no woman’s feelings; he would not love and ride away. He would put a bridle upon his tongue; but he would make it his business to pluck out the heart of the Marchant mystery. Surely among five girls he could manage to be kind and friendly without entangling himself with any one of the five.</p>
			<p>Having made out for himself a line of conduct, he walked back to the lake. The shadows of twilight were creeping over the grass. There were very few people on the ice. The Marchants had taken off their skates, and were saying good-bye to the two curates who had been their attendant swains.</p>
			<p>“We have such an awful way to walk if we go by the high-road, and we must go that way, for the footpath will be snowed up,” said Sophy. “It will be dark long before we are home.”</p>
			<p>The curates had, one an evening school, the other a penny reading, coming on at half-past seven, so they were fain to say good-night. Vansittart came up as they parted.</p>
			<p>“Let me walk home with you,” he said; “I haven’t had nearly enough walking.”</p>
			<p>“Then what a tremendous walker you must be!” said Jenny; “I saw you marching over the grass just now as if you were walking for a wager.”</p>
			<p>His attendance was accepted tacitly, and presently he and Eve were walking side by side, in the rear, while the two younger girls walked on in front, turning round every now and then to join in the conversation, so that the four made one party.</p>
			<p>Eve’s eyes were bright enough now, but she was more silent than she had been at their tea-drinking, and she was evidently out of spirits.</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid you didn’t enjoy the skating this afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“Not much. The mornings are pleasanter. We came too late.”</p>
			<p>“Shall you come to-morrow morning?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; I have promised my young sisters to bring them for a long morning. They won’t let me off.”</p>
			<p>“Do they skate?”</p>
			<p>“Hetty skates. The little one only slides. She is a most determined slider.”</p>
			<p>“Does Colonel Marchant never come with you?”</p>
			<p>“Never. He does not care about walking with girls.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps it is presumptuous in a bachelor to speculate on domestic feelings, but I think if I were a widower with five nice daughters my chief delight would be in going about with them.”</p>
			<p>“If you look round among your friends I fancy you will find that kind of father the exception rather than the rule,” Eve answered, with a touch of bitterness.</p>
			<p>They walked on in silence for a little while after this, she looking straight before her into the cool grey evening, he stealing an occasional glance at her profile.</p>
			<p>How pretty she was! The pearly complexion was so delicate, and yet so fresh and glowing in its youthful health. Hygeia herself might have had just such a complexion. The features, too, so neatly cut, the nose as clear in its chiselling as if it were pure Grecian, but with just that little tilt at the tip which gave piquancy to the face. The mouth was more thoughtful than he cared to see the lips of girlhood, for those pensive lines suggested domestic anxieties; but when she smiled or laughed the thoughtfulness vanished, lost in a radiant gaiety that shone like sunlight over all her countenance. He could not doubt that a happy disposition, a power of rising superior to small sordid cares, was a leading characteristic of her nature.</p>
			<p>She had natural cheerfulness, the richest dowry a wife can bring to husband and home. Presently, as he swung his stick against the light tracery of hawthorn and blackberry, a happy thought occurred to him. His sister had pledged herself to be kind to these motherless girls. Her kindness could not begin too soon.</p>
			<p>“You are to bring your sisters to the ice to-morrow morning, Miss Marchant,” he said presently. “What do you call morning?”</p>
			<p>“I hope we shall be there before eleven. The mornings are so lovely in this frosty weather.”</p>
			<p>“The mornings are delicious. Come as early as you possibly can. After two hours’ skating you will be tolerably tired, I should think⁠—though you walk with the air of a person who does not know what it is to be tired⁠—so you must all come to lunch with my sister.”</p>
			<p>“You are very kind,” said Eve, blushing, and suddenly radiant with her happiest smile, “but we could not think of such a thing.”</p>
			<p>“I understand. You would not come at my invitation. You think I have no rights in the case. Yet it would be hard if a brother couldn’t ask his friends to his sister’s house.”</p>
			<p>“Friends, perhaps, yes; but we are mere acquaintance.”</p>
			<p>“Please don’t say anything so unkind. I felt that we were friends from the first, you and your sisters and I, from the hour we found you on the top of the hill, when I mistook you for fairies. However, all the exigencies of the situation shall be complied with. My sister shall write to you this evening.”</p>
			<p>“Pray, pray don’t suggest such a thing,” entreated Eve, very much in earnest. “Lady Hartley will think us vulgar, pushing girls.”</p>
			<p>“Lady Hartley will think nothing of the kind. She was saying, only a few hours ago, that she would like to see more of you all. You must all come, remember⁠—all five. The Champernownes leave by an early train to-morrow morning,” he added cheerfully; “there will be plenty of room for you.”</p>
			<p>“Are the Miss Champernownes going away?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, they go on to a much smarter house, where baccarat is played of an evening, instead of our modest billiards and whist. My brother-in-law is a very sober personage. He is not in the movement. It is my private opinion that those three handsome young ladies have been unspeakably bored at Redwold Towers.”</p>
			<p>“I am very glad they are going,” answered Eve, frankly. “We don’t know them, so their going or coming ought not to make any difference to us. But there is something oppressive about them. They are so handsome, they dress so well, and they seem so thoroughly pleased with themselves.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, there’s where the offence comes in. Isn’t it odd that from the moment a man or woman lets other people see that he or she is thoroughly delighted with his or her individuality, talents, beauty, or worldly position, everybody else begins to detest that person? A Shakespeare or a Scott must go through life with a seeming unconsciousness of his own powers, if he would have his fellow-men love him.”</p>
			<p>“I think both Shakespeare and Scott contrived to do so, and that is one of the reasons why all the world worships them,” said Eve, and on this slight ground they founded a long conversation upon their favourite books and authors. He did not find her “cultured.” Of the learning which pervades modern drawing-rooms⁠—the learning of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Fortnightly</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Contemporary</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Nineteenth Century</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Macmillan</i>⁠—he found her sorely deficient. She had read no new books, she knew nothing of recent theories in art, science, or religion. She knew her Shakespeare and Scott, her Dickens, Thackeray, and Bulwer-Lytton, and had read the poets whom everybody reads. She had never heard of Marlow, and Beaumont and Fletcher were to her only names. She revelled in fiction, the old, familiar fiction of the great masters; but history was a blank. She had not read Froude; she had never heard of Green, Gardiner, Freeman, or Maine.</p>
			<p>“You will find us woefully ignorant,” she explained, when she had answered in the negative about several books, which to him were of the best. “We have only had a nursery governess. She was a dear old thing, but I don’t think you could imagine a more ignorant person. She came to us when I was six, and she only left us when Peggy was nine, and she would have stayed on as a kind of Duenna, only she had a poor, old, infirm mother, and she was the only spinster daughter left, and so had to go home and nurse the mother. She was very strong upon the multiplication table, and she was pretty good at French. She knew La Grammaire des Grammaires by heart, I believe. But as to history or literature! Even the little we contrived to pick up for ourselves was enough to enable us to make fun of her. We used to ask her why Charles the Second didn’t make Erasmus a bishop, or whether Eleanor of Aquitaine was the daughter or only the niece of Charlemagne. She always tumbled into any trap we set for her.”</p>
			<p>“A lax idea of chronology, that was all,” said Vansittart.</p>
			<p>He walked very nearly to the Homestead, and was dead beat by the time he got back to Redwold Towers. He had been tramping about ever since luncheon. He and Eve Marchant had done a good deal of talking in that four-mile walk, but not once had he mentioned Sefton’s name, nor had he made the faintest attempt to discover the drift of that confidential conversation of which a few brief sentences had reached his ear. Yet those sentences haunted his memory, and the thought of them came between him and all happier thoughts of Eve Marchant.</p>
			<p>His sister was considerably his junior, and he had been accustomed to order her to do this or that from her babyhood upward, she deeming herself honoured in obeying his caprices. It was a small thing, then, for him to request her to invite Miss Marchant and all her sisters to luncheon next day.</p>
			<p>“Do you really mean me to ask all three?” questioned Maud, arching her delicate eyebrows in mild wonder.</p>
			<p>“I mean you to ask all five. The little girls are coming to skate on your pond. Give them a good lunch, Maud. Let there be game and kickshaws, such as girls like⁠—and plenty of puddings.”</p>
			<p>“All five! How absurd!”</p>
			<p>“You said you would be kind to them.”</p>
			<p>“But five! Well, I don’t suppose the number need make any difference. What alarms me is the idea of getting too friendly with them⁠—a dropping in to lunch or tea acquaintance, don’t you know. The girls are as good as gold, I have no doubt; but they lead such an impossible life with that impossible father⁠—he almost always away, no chaperon, no nice aunts to look after them⁠—only an old Yorkshire servant and a bit of a girl to open the door. It is all too dreadful.”</p>
			<p>“From your point of view, no doubt; but lives as dreadful are being led by a good many families all over England, and out of lives as dreadful has come a good deal of the intellectual power of the country. Come, Maud, don’t prattle, but write your letter⁠—just a friendly little letter to say that I have told you they are coming to skate, and that you must insist upon their stopping to lunch.”</p>
			<p>He had found her in her boudoir just before dressing for dinner, and in the very act of sealing the last of a batch of letters. She took up her pen at his bidding, and dashed off an invitation, almost in his own words, with a thick stroke of the J pen under “insist.”</p>
			<p>“Will that do?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Admirably,” said Vansittart, with his hand on the bell. “All you have to do is to order a groom to ride to the Homestead with it.”</p>
			<p>“Hadn’t I better invite <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sefton to meet them?” inquired Maud, with a malicious little laugh.</p>
			<p>“Why?”</p>
			<p>“Because he is said to be running after Miss Marchant. I only hope <i xml:lang="fr">pour le bon motif</i>.”</p>
			<p>“However shady a customer Colonel Marchant may be, I shouldn’t think any man would dare to approach his daughter with a bad motive,” said Vansittart, sternly.</p>
			<p>“The Colonel encourages him, I am told; so I suppose it is all right.”</p>
			<p>“You are told,” cried Vansittart, scornfully. “What is this cloud of unseen witnesses which compasses about village life so that what a man owes, what a man eats, what a man thinks and purposes are common topics of conversation for people who never enter his house? It is petty to childishness, all this twaddle about Colonel Marchant and his daughters.”</p>
			<p>“Jack, Jack!” cried Maud, shaking her head. “I can only say I am sorry for you. And now run away, for goodness’ sake. We shall both be late for dinner. I shall only have time to throw on a tea-gown.”</p>
			<p>A footman brought Lady Hartley a letter at half-past nine that evening. Vansittart crossed the drawing-room to hear the result of the invitation.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:salutation">“Dear Lady Hartley</b>,</p>
				<p>“It is too good of you to ask us to luncheon after skating, and I know it will be a treat for my young sisters to see your beautiful house, so I am pleased to accept your kind invitation for the two youngest and myself. Sophy and Jenny beg to thank you for including them, but they cannot think of inflicting so large a party as five upon you.</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Very sincerely yours,</span><br/>
					<b epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“Eve Marchant</b>.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“She has more discretion than you have, at any rate, Jack,” said Maud, as he read the letter over her shoulder.</p>
			<p>“She writes a fine bold hand,” said he, longing to ask for the letter, the first letter of hers that his eyes had looked upon.</p>
			<p>“I’m very sorry the five are not coming,” he went on. “Those two poor girls will have a scurvy luncheon at home, I dare say⁠—dismal martyrs to conventionality. You must ask them another day.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll see how to-morrow’s selection behave,” answered Maud, with her light laugh.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Vansittart was on the pathway by the lake before eleven o’clock, and he had a bad half-hour of waiting before Eve and her two young sisters appeared at the lodge. He met them near the gates, and they set off for the ice together.</p>
			<p>“I hear you only slide,” he said to the little one, who was red as a rose after the long walk through the nipping air. “That won’t do. You must turn over a new leaf to-day, and learn to skate. I’m going to teach you.”</p>
			<p>“That would be lovely,” answered Peggy; “but I’ve got no skates.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but we must borrow a pair or steal a pair. Skates shall be found somehow.”</p>
			<p>“Won’t that be jolly?” cried Peggy.</p>
			<p>The skates were found at the lodge, where Vansittart coolly appropriated a pair belonging to one of the little girls at the nearest parsonage, and the lesson was given. A lesson was also given to Eve, who skated fairly well, but not so well as Vansittart after one winter’s experience in Norway and another in Vienna. Sefton came strolling on to the ice while they were skating, and tried to monopolize Miss Marchant; but the young lady treated him in rather an off-hand manner, greatly to Vansittart’s delight. He hung about the lake for some time talking to one or another of his neighbours, most of the young people of the neighbourhood and a good many of the middle-aged being assembled this fine morning. Towards one o’clock he came up to Eve, who was playing hockey with a number of girls. “Is the Colonel at home?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes, father came home last night.”</p>
			<p>“Then I’ll walk over and see him. It’s a splendid day for a good long tramp. Let me know when you and your sisters are leaving, that I may walk with you. That road is uncommonly lonely for girls.”</p>
			<p>“You are very kind; but we are never afraid of the road. And to-day we are not going home for ever so long,” added Eve, joyously. “We are going to lunch with Lady Hartley.”</p>
			<p>“That alters the case,” said Sefton, prodigiously surprised. “Then I’ll look your father up another day, when I can be of some use as an escort. I dare say <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Vansittart will see you home.”</p>
			<p>“Haven’t I told you that we want no escort?” exclaimed Eve, impatiently. “One would think there were lions between here and Fernhurst.”</p>
			<p>“There are frozen-out gardeners and such-like, I dare say. Quite as bad as lions,” he answered, as he turned on his heel, jealous and angry.</p>
			<p>This fellow was evidently pursuing her with some kind of suit, Vansittart thought. Could he mean to marry her? Could any man with an established position in the county mean to ally himself with Colonel Marchant?</p>
			<p>Vansittart had seen the two talking, but had not been near enough to hear what they said. He rejoiced at seeing Sefton walk away discomfited. There was anger in the carriage of his head as he turned away from her. He had been snubbed evidently. But if she snubbed him to-day, must she not have sometimes encouraged his attentions? He had all the manner of a man to whom certain rights have been given.</p>
			<p>They walked up to the house merrily, over the grey, frosty grass, Hetty and Peggy running on in front and racing and wheeling like fox-terriers, so elated by the day’s delights. Peggy had distinguished herself on her borrowed skates. Her teacher declared she was a born skater.</p>
			<p>Lady Hartley was sunning herself in the broad portico, waiting to receive her guests. Miss Green had gone out shooting with Sir Hubert and his party. There were only <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Baddington, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tivett at home.</p>
			<p>“Only us two men among all you ladies,” said Tivett, cheerily, as they assembled before the huge wood fire in the drawing-room.</p>
			<p>“Hadn’t you better say us one and a half, Gussie?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Baddington, laughing. “It seems rather absurd to talk of yourself and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Vansittart as if you were of the same weight and substance.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tivett, who was half hidden between Hetty and Peggy, received this attack with his usual amiability. “Never mind weight and substance,” he said; “in moral influence I feel myself a giant.”</p>
			<p>“Not without justification,” said Vansittart. “If you were to compare Tivett’s reception at a West End tea-party with mine you would see what a poor thing mere brute force is in an intellectual environment.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, they like me,” replied Tivett, modestly, “because I can talk chiffons. I can tell them of the newest ladies’ tailor⁠—some little man who lives in an alley, but has found out the way to cut a habit or a coat, and is going to take the town by storm next season. I can put them up to the newest shade of bronze or auburn hair⁠—the Princess’s shade. I can tell them lots of things, and the dear souls know that I am interested in all that interests them.”</p>
			<p>“I never talk to Gussie Tivett without thinking how much nicer a womanly man is than a manly woman,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Baddington, meditatively.</p>
			<p>“Ah, that is because the former imitates the superior sex, the latter the inferior,” answered Lady Hartley.</p>
			<p>Eve sat in the snug armchair where Vansittart had placed her, silent, but happy, looking about the room and admiring the wonderful mixture of old and new things; furniture that was really old, furniture that cleverly reproduced the antique; trifles and modern inventions of all kinds which make a rich woman’s drawing-room a wonderland for the dwellers in shabby houses; the tall standard lamps of copper or brass or wrought iron, with their fantastical shades; the abundance of flowers and flowering plants and palms, in a season when for the commonalty flowers are not; all those things made an atmosphere of luxury which Colonel Marchant’s daughter needs must feel in sharpest contrast with her own surroundings.</p>
			<p>She admired without a pang of envy. She had taken her surroundings for granted a long time ago; and so long as her father was able to pacify his creditors by occasional payments, and so long as rates and taxes got themselves settled without desperate measures, Eve Marchant was at peace with destiny.</p>
			<p>While her senses of sight and scent were absorbing the beauty and perfume of the room, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart came in from a walk with the nurse and baby, and her son made haste to introduce his sister’s guest.</p>
			<p>“Mother, this is Miss Marchant,” he said briefly, and Eve rose blushing to acknowledge the elder woman’s greeting.</p>
			<p>He would not commit himself, forsooth. Why, in the look he gave her as she rose shyly to take his mother’s hand, in the tenderness of his tone as he spoke her name, he was committing himself almost as deeply as if he had said outright, “Mother, this is the woman I love, and I want you to love her.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart, prejudiced by much that she had heard of the Marchant household, could but acknowledge to herself that the Colonel’s eldest daughter was passing fair, and that this sensitive countenance in which the bloom came and went at a breath, had as candid and innocent an outlook as even a mother’s searching eye could desire in the countenance of her son’s beloved. But then, unhappily, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vansittart had seen enough of the world and its ways to know that appearances are deceitful, and that many a blushing bride whose drooping head and gentle bashfulness suggested the innocence that might ride on lions and not be afraid, has afterwards made a shameful figure in the Divorce Court.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
